Portland Clean Energy Community Benefits Fund (PCEF) Grants Committee
July 29nd, 2020 - MEETING MINUTES
Committee members present: Jeff Moreland Jr., Michael Edden Hill, Ranfis Villatoro, Robin Wang, Maria Sipin,
Megan Horst, Faith Graham, Andrea Hamberg, Shanice Clark
PCEF staff present: Sam Baraso, Cady Lister, Jaimes Valdez, Janet Hammer
MEETING DECISIONS/ACTION ITEMS
• Committee accepted July 22 Meeting Minutes.
• Committee approved staff to move forward with finalizing large grant application questions and scoring.
Substance of application questions and scoring will not change. Staff will increase accessibility through
language and design improvements. Committee will have opportunity to review and approve final
version when they approve the Request for Proposal.
MEETING SUMMARY NOTES
No public comment
Large Grants: Continuing from last week, staff outlined where changes were made to the draft large grant
application and scoring in response to public feedback – this time with special attention the workforce benefits
section of the application. Committee member feedback on the three options for addressing workforce
composition section was not unanimous, however, the most support was for option B.
• Megan – thinking about feedback from Randy Ramos (member of public who is a minority contractor
and gave public comment at the last meeting), we can include tables requesting demographic detail, but
people may not be able to accurately forecast, what do we do with that? I do like asking for specifics and
goals but want them to be based on something real.
Sam – other community members said the same. We will be checking with several folks to see
o
what does it mean to answer this question. These are things that we want people to be
accountable to.
• Ranfis – Worth listening to feedback from community, feedback from contractors is where this can feel
nebulous, many contractors sit on joint apprenticeship training boards, contractors play a role in the
process of how we diversify this industry, without goals/north star there is no strategy for getting where
we want to go.
• Sam – looking for committee approval of the content, words/structure/style is to come, what you saw is
not what an applicant would see, there will be visual design for accessibility of language and ease of use.
Bring back final RFP for approval. At that point, not a content question.
• Faith – are there threshold points or certain questions that need to be answered in a certain way in
order to be awarded? Project description – scoring criteria – realistically result in intended outcomes,
what if a brilliant application had unrealistic anticipation of results?
Cady – the Committee didn’t set any thresholds that the scoring panels will deal with, though
o
the technical feasibility screen will eliminate applications that are not feasible and these will
never get to scoring panel. Also, if the project scope is unworkable, it is likely that the same
application will score poorly in other sections as well.
• Jeffrey – The criteria about apprentice utilization rate, are we getting rid of that? Did that get resolved?
• Sam – reached out to stakeholders, no reply, clarified question and left the question in but are no longer
asking about ratios, and instead focusing on the percentage of work hours to apprentices, 2 points.
• Jeffrey – do we want to explore further or is committee fine with 2 points? Michael/Ranfis?
• Sam – heard that the criteria was important for some and not for others. The push for inclusion came
from workforce advocates in the apprenticeship space. We are going to leave it in for now and see how
it plays out this first solicitation; tried to reconnect with that person but they were out of town.
• Ranfis – workforce pieces, there is a lot of room to improve, feedback from public, consideration around
the quality of install, research shows that insulation install, shows a true difference in the outcome of
savings, important, ETO has some measurement tools, something we may want to consider through
RFP, workforce agreement or technical review, we want to ensure quality installation of any measure we
are funding.
Cady – we have our eye on protecting safety and health of occupants; anticipate dealing with
o
that through requirements and verification on backend.
• Faith – GHG calculation, love the solution, staff will do that calculation, based off of information in
project scoping through Appendix A.
• Andrea – has staff thought about when the survey of applicants will happen?
Sam – experience for applicants is just as important as program outcomes, what is the
o
appropriate timing, need to check in with team, open to thoughts and comments, how we make
this better is important, we haven’t sketched it out yet.
Andrea – might be some benefit in doing it before the review of the applications. If we have
o
missed something critical for our core organizations in this process and we get feedback in the
survey that could help us understand how to review applications better.
Sam – there will be QA, public sessions, answers published publicly, we anticipate we will hear
o
from people in real time.
• Ranfis – recognition that there will be applicants that shine on paper, for others this way of
communicating may be harder, we are leaning towards good writers in this, thinking through the limits
of written apps. Want to build transformative relationship with prospective applicants and know that we
all have inherent bias that comes out when we read different writing styles.
• Megan – want to be more inclusive in defining women – all women – all people who identify as women,
it reads very binary. Also want to make sure that disability is not defined too narrowly.
Ranfis – support Megan’s suggestion on being more inclusive on gender.
o
Sam – we can do that; we would be clearly calling out women = anyone identifies as women.
o
Cady – at one point the table had a lot more detailed demographics, it was changed for different
o
reasons multiple times, became unwieldy and was eventually reduced to identities in code. Will
make sure to be inclusive in language in RFP and guidance but would like to leave the table as is
noting that, as with all of the demographic categories woman is defined as woman identifying, is
that ok?
Megan – thumbs up
o
• Cady – temperature check, is there comfort with moving into final drafting phase? Call on each:
Ranfis – personally would spend more time on workforce if I could, but don’t want to be the
o
barrier, there will be mistakes, first year, lets continue to move forward.
Jeffrey – ok with moving forward, we have gone through thoroughly, we will make mistakes.
o
Megan – good with progress we have made; confident moving forward and learning from our
o
first round.
Maria – I don’t feel strongly about any one direction, we may still be distributed on a bell curve.
o
Do we need a consensus and then a proposal, some of us may say, yeah this is good enough, I
still want to hear strong feelings but people may not want that.
Robin – generally good with things, first pass, year 1, largely there, not perfection.
o
Andrea – first year, good improvements, happy to move forward.
o
Faith – feel really good about where we are, we can’t achieve perfection, love that we have
o
been responsive and adapt to unexpected comments that we are not serving community as we
should, good with where we are, and our commitment adapt.
Michael – best thing out of 2020 so far for me, appreciate the work, I’ve learned a lot, I have my
o
concerns about ease of use and accessibility, I am hoping you will have a glossary of terms.
Workforce and contractor equity has had a lot of input from contractors and not a lot from
workforce, I’m pretty warm on this for our first go.
Shanice – journey to here, a lot of significant detours and improvements, I’m in alignment with
o
it, it being our first year, thinking about what we want this work to accomplish, even in the first
year.
• Cady – general agreement on the committee that the substance is ready for staff to move to final draft,
the one area with bell curve distributed opinions is the workforce section, this is a reflection that we
have Committee members that bring unique perspectives to the table, what we landed on feels like a
compromise, not a consensus, not sure we would get closer with more discussion, if we are warm to
good with us moving forward, I suggest that we do that now.
• Ranfis – I agree with your assessment Cady and to Michael’s point, the voice that is less heard, when we
think about our north star, it needs to include workers, the part we see and don’t see every day, that’s
the voice that we don’t hear, what are the barriers to get into the trades, what are their every day
concerns, what does living wage mean to them, ideally this process would have started 1-2 years ago.
• Robin – I move to accept the substance of the large grant document (application and scoring) that was
shared with us
Ranfis – second
o
Jeffrey – I agree
o
Megan – I agree
o
Maria – I agree
o
Andrea – I agree
o
Faith – I agree
o
Michael – I agree, we will vote again on final RFP? (Cady -yes)
o
Shanice – I agree.
o
Small and Planning Grants:
Staff provided an overview of the differences between small and large grant applications and scoring noting that
small grant development gave additional attention to removing barriers for new and emerging organizations,
that at the lower dollar cap we will probably see less construction, more one-offs, provide services to priority
populations, organizations that don’t work in this space normally but might do a one-time project, etc. Planning
grants are substantially different in application and scoring. Staff walked through these draft documents with
Committee. Staff requested comments on small and planning grant drafts by Sunday evening.
• Ranfis – as you remove the historic record of work with priority populations criteria, you might be
creating incentive for non-profit social enterprises, send market signal to form off-shoot?
• Megan – Eight points seems low for future project climate and social justice benefits, we want all
projects to do those things, if there is another funnel happening somewhere, I like that they are
together but am also wondering if there is benefit to pulling apart.
Cady – acknowledge uncertainty around future projects, not too many points on
o
future/uncertain, want space for planning to discover what they intended may not be best.
• Faith – eligibility says this needs to be climate action/social justice – these are not necessarily social
justice outcomes.
• Ranfis – like social justice question around organization description, scoring framed around knowledge
of priority communities, PCEF guiding principles – is that enough? Additional criteria could look at an
organization’s analysis around systems change, how to transform lives for the population(s) they serve,
add thoughts to criteria about root causes of oppression or systems change.
Ranfis – why this might be worth considering, a lot of groups could get additional social justice
o
points, real work doers will shine in the analysis, good intentions can lead to bad outcomes,
asking a question around analysis and lived experience.
Sam – theory of change can be hard to understand, is there a simple way to describe this?
o
Doesn’t have to be now. Any suggestions on what that could look like for next week.
Maria – the ways to break it down, ask how are you shifting power to those that didn’t have
o
power before? What relationships do you have that are essential to moving equity forward?
Maybe an org only needs to do an assessment or audit, they can still make room for knowledge
exchange, bring up people, demo ways to bring people in the space who have not been brought
in before, want to incorporate what planning could be.
Ranfis – Asking an organization’s background, anyone can talk about how it impacts frontline
o
communities but answering why is different, gives further weight to different community groups
and how they show up in this space.
• Sam – our starting place is wanting to make planning grant easy.
• Maria – reflecting a lot and thinking about our grants, how much of this is transactional, seed money not
thinking about next steps, how do we set people up to develop a long-term relationship with this work?
Maybe they just want transaction, but I like to think people want a long-term relationship, climate
equity history work checks out, won’t need to fudge a history to qualify.
Sam – come into a relationship with the program as part of this effort, is there something
o
specific that calls that out more? Hope you see the core elements focus on priority populations
and representation, might be more?
Maria – that covers it, feels like there is so much to talk about, maybe not this conversation.
o
9:00 pm - Meeting adjourned